Managing behaviour page (#3931)
DFE-Digital/get-into-teaching-app: app/views/content/is-teaching-right-for-me/behaviour-management.md

---
title: "Managing behaviour in the classroom"
heading: "Managing behaviour in the classroom"

> subcategory: Qualifications and experience

Reviewer: This feels a bit odd in terms of location - `Qualifications and experience` is what you need to have

I appreciate that we are creating this page before we create the proper section for which it should go in though!

Do we need a new blue subcategory for this page (maybe bring in the ECT page alongside it as that is orphaned currently)?

Author: I was struggling a bit as to where it should sit as I thought it should definitely be in the ITRFM section for the time being. So I think a new subcategory with the ECT page is a great idea.

description: |-

>   Teacher training adviser Jane Wilkinson answers questions about how to manage behaviour in the classroom.

Reviewer: I think it would be worth looking at search terms and rewording this - eg `behaviour management` is more important than `Teacher training adviser Jane Wilkinson` in terms of SEO

date: "2024-01-09"
backlink: "../../"
navigation: 5.35
navigation_title: How can I manage behaviour in the classroom?
navigation_description: Teacher training adviser Jane Wilkinson answers common concerns around behaviour management.
promo_content:
    - content/train-to-be-a-teacher/promos/mailing-list-promo-salaries
related_content:
    How to become a teacher : "/steps-to-become-a-teacher"
    What to expect in teacher training : "/train-to-be-a-teacher/initial-teacher-training" 
    Early career teachers (ECTs) : "/support-for-early-career-teachers"

keywords:
  - Behaviour management
  - Managing behaviour
  - Disruptive behaviour
  - Challenging behaviour
  - Disruptive pupils
  - Difficult pupils
  - Positive behaviour
  - Classroom teaching
  - NQT
  - National professional qualification
  - Support
  - Training
  - Teacher training
  - ECF
  - Teaching
  - How to become a teacher
  - Teacher training courses
  - Behaviour
  - Management
  - classroom concerns
---

> Teacher training adviser Jane Wilkinson has years of teaching experience. She answers some common concerns that trainee teachers have around how to manage behaviour in the classroom.

Reviewer: may have? often have?

## How can I create a positive learning environment?

> In my experience of teaching hundreds of thousands of children, if they’re engrossed in their learning and know what it is they need to be doing, they'll be much less disruptive. The biggest challenge isn't usually big things it’s more the chatting and low-level disruption.  

Reviewer: Surely not **hundreds** of thousands?

> In my experience of teaching hundreds of thousands of children, if they’re engrossed in their learning and know what it is they need to be doing, they'll be much less disruptive. The biggest challenge isn't usually big things it’s more the chatting and low-level disruption.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my experience of teaching hundreds of thousands of children, if they’re engrossed in their learning and know what it is they need to be doing, they'll be much less disruptive. The biggest challenge isn't usually big things, it’s more the chatting and low-level disruption.  
```

> Make sure you’re very clear. If children understand your expectations of them in terms of workload, behaviour and outcome and you scaffold that journey then behaviour becomes much less of a problem. Start off by modelling what you would want in your classroom. Do you want the children lining up at the start of the lesson? Or do you want them coming straight in and starting with the work?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you’re very clear. If children understand your expectations of them in terms of workload, behaviour and outcomes and you scaffold that journey then behaviour becomes much less of a problem. Start off by modelling what you would want in your classroom. Do you want the children lining up at the start of the lesson? Or do you want them coming straight in and starting with the work?
```

also - is there an easier way of saying 'scaffold that journey'?

Author: @gemmadallmandfe I've just deleted scaffold that journey as I don't think it's needed.

Have routines and rituals or standard operational procedures so children know when they go to your class, this is what they do. So they understand what's required from them and know they'll be rewarded if they get that behaviour right.

## How do I manage more disruptive behaviour?

> Managing behaviour is a learning curve, and exactly what a teacher training course is designed for. You'll be offered practical guidance and support so don’t worry if you don’t get it right every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing behaviour is a learning curve, and exactly what a teacher training course is designed for. You'll be offered practical guidance and support so don’t worry if you don’t get it right every time.
```

Is it worth adding in something like `if you feel nervous` etc.? It is quite a leap to `don't get it right every time` if you are worried about it before applying

It’s all about the relationships you build with pupils. If they know they’ll get away with disruptive learning, they'll disrupt learning.

> You have to set and communicate firm but fair boundaries so they know they're safe and won't be ridiculed or embarrassed and their learning comes first. They’ll push against these boundaries because that’s what children do. But if they find they meet with a brick wall they won't push any further because they know what's going to happen in any lesson they turn up to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have to set and communicate firm but fair boundaries so they know they're safe and won't be ridiculed or embarrassed and their learning comes first. They’ll push against these boundaries because that’s what children do. But if they are met with a brick wall they won't push any further because they know what's going to happen in any lesson they turn up to. 
```

And follow up on infringements, regardless of how long it takes to reach the result you intend. But don’t threaten anything you're not able to follow up with, like detention for the rest of their life!

## How do I build relationships with pupils?
Often building relationships with pupils happens outside of the classroom. It’s having conversations at break time in the corridor or as the kids are coming into school or at after school club. And talking to pupils, not just about what they're learning from you, but taking an interest in them as people. What did they have for their tea last night? How’s their poorly dog? What kind of things that make them laugh or sad and getting to know their authentic self.

But it has to be a two-way thing, you’ve got to give a little of yourself so they can empathise. So you could share your hopes and dreams. And if you've got a cat at home, that always helps.

## How can I reward good behaviour?

> Children tend to respond well to praise. It might be telling them they've done really well, or giving them a merit or a community point or whatever your school does. It's this kind of positive reinforcement that you would constantly do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Children tend to respond well to praise. It might be telling them they've done really well, or giving them a merit or a community point or whatever your school does. You would constantly do this kind of positive reinforcement.
```
Last sentence feels a bit awkward - is it worth rejiging?

> I always worked with parents as well, sending out postcards or making phone calls to tell them their child's been brilliant that day. It only takes a few seconds to do but the rewards in that can be huge. I might start a class and tell them I've got 2 brilliant phone calls home to give out. So they're competing with themselves to try and be the best that they can. But never promise something you're not going to deliver. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I always worked with parents and carers as well, sending out postcards or making phone calls to tell them their child's been brilliant that day. It only takes a few seconds to do but the rewards in that can be huge. I might start a class and tell them I've got 2 brilliant phone calls home to give out. So they're competing with themselves to try and be the best that they can. But never promise something you're not going to deliver. 
```

A lot of the worst behaviours are when children feel rejected so they strive towards that. It's about resetting that mindset in that child. So rather than wanting for example to be the class clown, the label they've given themself is reframed so they’re the better learner, or the most organised, or best at sport. It’s recognising where can they achieve. Finding that is the key to getting it right. 

## What support is there for trainee teachers?
As a teacher you’re never going to be perfect. You’re constantly learning and the variety and support you get through your day through learning all of these different things is really important.

> If you have to pay a fee to do your teacher training course and it leads to qualified teacher status (QTS) you might see lots of different classes and how a particular teacher works with them. Or you might go round with a particular student and see what a day in their lives looks like, with the different teachers they may have that day. This allows you to pick up strategies other people may use while also seeing what kind of challenges a particular class or  child might have during that period of time.

Reviewer: `If you have to pay a fee` feels really awkward? Can we not be more generic?

also double-space needs removing

```suggestion
As part of your teacher training course, you might see lots of different classes and how a particular teacher works with them. Or you might go round with a particular student and see what a day in their lives looks like, with the different teachers they may have that day. This allows you to pick up strategies other people may use while also seeing what kind of challenges a particular class or child might have during that period of time.
```

Then you might work either with small groups or one-to-one with pupils. Again you're observing and analysing what's working. You're not alone. You've got a teacher there so if you think something didn't quite land you've got somebody to bounce ideas off and look at how you might change it.

> ## Once I become a teacher is there any support available?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Is there any support once I become a teacher?
```

> All schools have behaviour policies in place. So you work within a remit to ensure best practice and that there's consistency with how behaviour is managed as a school. As a teacher you're not expected to manage behaviour on your own, you get an induction on your school's behaviour policies and preferred ways of management.

Author: I'm really anti semi-colons! So I'll split into 2.

> All schools have behaviour policies in place, so you work within a remit. If your course leads to QTS, for the first two years of teaching as an [early career teacher (ECT)](/support-for-early-career-teachers) you'll have a named mentor. But you've also got other colleagues and it's not unheard of for somebody to sit down and say they're having a problem with child A what are you doing to keep them in line? You're constantly working together to swap ideas, sanctions and bits of information about that child. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All schools have behaviour policies in place, so you work within a remit. If your course leads to QTS, for the first two years of teaching as an [early career teacher (ECT)](/support-for-early-career-teachers) you'll have a named mentor. But you've also got other colleagues and it's not unheard of for somebody to sit down and say they're having a problem with child A and what are you doing to keep them in line? You're constantly working together to swap ideas, sanctions and bits of information about that child. 
```

> If your course leads to QTS, for the first two years of teaching as an [early career teacher (ECT)](/support-for-early-career-teachers) you get ongoing training and development that includes effective behaviour management. Plus you'll have a dedicated mentor to give you support. And you've also got other senior members of staff and colleagues who can help. It's not unheard of for somebody to sit down and say they're struggling to manage the behaviour of child A, are there any strategies you've found successful? You're constantly working together to swap ideas, sanctions and bits of information about that child.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of QTS on this page so it needs explaining.

It also feels a little clunky - could we say something like:

`If you have qualified teacher status (QTS), for the first two years.....`

It's not about the course leading to QTS, it's about whether they **have** QTS (ie have been awarded it at the end of the course)

## How can I remember children's names?
Knowing a child’s name is a really powerful behaviour management tool, so learning names is essential for building strong relationships.

Making sure pupils put their names on the top of their page provides a helpful prompt for you. You can also make a seating plan and keep that handy. Doing an ice-breaker activity with new classes where pupils say their names and something that is unique to them is a great technique too.

Giving them nicknames can also be a good way to help you remember and it makes the children feel special too.

## If I'm a quiet person will I be assertive enough?

> Your teacher training course will allow you to experiment with the best tone of voice for your own teaching style. Observe as many teachers as you can and cherry-pick the techniques and skills that they use for your own classroom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your teacher training course will allow you to experiment with the best tone of voice for your own teaching style. Observe as many teachers as you can and cherrypick the techniques and skills that they use for your own classroom.
```

Author: @gemmadallmandfe this is from the original blog post. I checked online and the consensus seems to be cherry-pick is hyphenated. https://www.oed.com/dictionary/cherry-pick_v?tl=true https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/cherry-pick
